>> Larson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, AUGUST 22: A POTENTIAL
MASS SHOOTING ON A TRAIN IN
FRANCE IS PREVENTED.
NEW TALKS BEGIN TO DEFUSE A
POTENTIAL MILITARY CONFRONTATION
BETWEEN NORTH AND SOUTH KOREA.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
CAN PUERTO RICO CLIMB OUT OF ITS
FINANCIAL CRISIS AND PAY OFF ITS
RECORD DEBT?
DO YOU THINK PUERTO RICO WILL BE
SEEN AS GREECE?
>> IT'S HAPPENING ALREADY,
AND I HATE IT.
PUERTO RICO'S NOT GREECE.
PUERTO RICO'S NOT A FOREIGN
COUNTRY.
>> Larson: NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
JOHN LARSON.
>> Larson: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M JOHN LARSON IN FOR HARI
SREENIVASAN.
THE PRESIDENTS OF FRANCE AND
THE UNITED STATES ARE PRAISING
THREE AMERICANS WHO SUBDUED A
GUNMAN WHO ATTEMPTED TO CARRY
OUT A MASS SHOOTING ON A
PASSENGER TRAIN HEADING TOWARDS
PARIS.
THE HIGH SPEED THALYS TRAIN,
GOING FROM AMSTERDAM TO PARIS
LAST NIGHT, HAD 554 PASSENGERS
ON BOARD.
AMONG THEM WERE THREE AMERICAN
FRIENDS IN THEIR EARLY 20s:
SPENCER STONE, ANTHONY SADLER,
AND ALEK SKARLATOS, TWO OF THEM
ACTIVE MEMBERS OF THE U.S.
MILITARY.
THE GUNMAN BOARDED THE TRAIN IN
BRUSSELS.
HE ENTERED A PASSENGER CAR
CARRYING AN AK-47 ASSAULT RIFLE,
AN AUTOMATIC HANDGUN, AND A BOX
CUTTER.
STONE, WHO IS IN THE AIR FORCE,
RAN DOWN THE AISLE AND TACKLED
THE GUNMAN.
>> I THINK SPENCER IS THE REAL
HERO.
HE WAS THE FIRST ONE TO JUMP ON
HIM.
HE IS THE ONE WHO GOT CUT UP.
LIKE, NONE OF US ARE INJURED BUT
SPENCER.
SPENCER TOOK A FEW INJURIES, AND
HE JUST HAD NO FEAR.
AND HE'S OUR FRIEND, SO ONCE WE
SAW HIM GO, WE HAD TO GO JOIN
HIM, LIKE WE COULDN'T HAVE JUST
LET EVERYBODY DIE LIKE THAT.
IT WAS CRAZY SITUATION.
>> Larson: SKARLATOS, WHO SERVES
IN THE NATIONAL GUARD AND WAS
RECENTLY DEPLOYED IN
AFGHANISTAN, WRESTLED THE GUN
AWAY.
>> HE HAD ABOUT 7 OR 8 MAGAZINES
IN HIS BACKPACK WITH HIM.
AND TWO FIREARMS.
SO, HE WAS THERE TO DO BUSINESS,
THAT'S FOR SURE.
WE ARE REALLY LUCKY THAT HIS AK
JAMMED, OR ELSE I DON'T KNOW HOW
IT WOULD HAVE TURNED OUT.
>> Larson: STONE, STABBED IN THE
NECK AND THE HAND DURING THE
STRUGGLE, HAS BEEN TREATED AND
RELEASED FROM A FRENCH HOSPITAL.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS TELEPHONED
THE THREE AMERICAN MEN TO
EXPRESS HIS GRATITUDE, AND
FRENCH OFFICIALS HAVE AWARDED
THEM MEDALS, ALONG WITH A
BRITISH BUSINESSMAN WHO HELPED
TIE UP THE GUNMAN.
THE GUNMAN'S IDENTITY HAS NOT
YET BEEN CONFIRMED, BUT FRENCH
OFFICIALS HAVE DESCRIBED HIM AS
A 26-YEAR-OLD MOROCCAN.
HE REMAINS IN POLICE CUSTODY IN
PARIS.
FRANCE AND BELGIUM HAVE
INCREASED POLICE PATROLS IN RAIL
STATIONS AND ON THE HIGH SPEED
TRAIN LINE, WHICH CONNECTS 17
EUROPEAN CITIES.
THE TRAINS HAVE NO METAL
DETECTORS OR SECURITY CHECKS.
OFFICIALS FROM NORTH AND SOUTH
KOREA MET TODAY IN AN EFFORT TO
EASE TENSIONS, FOLLOWING AN
EXCHANGE OF ARTILLERY FIRE
EARLIER THIS WEEK.
TODAY'S TALKS WERE HELD IN THE
DEMILITARIZED ZONE BETWEEN THE
TWO COUNTRIES, IN THE SAME TOWN
WHERE BOTH SIDES SIGNED THEIR
ARMISTICE IN 1953.
ON THURSDAY, NORTH KOREA FIRED
ROCKETS AT SOUTH KOREAN
LOUDSPEAKERS BROADCASTING ANTI-
NORTH KOREAN PROPAGANDA, AND
THREATENED FURTHER MILITARY
ACTION.
SOUTH KOREA RESPONDED BY FIRING
DOZENS OF ARTILLERY ROUNDS INTO
NORTH KOREA.
NO CASUALTIES WERE REPORTED ON
EITHER SIDE.
THE SOUTH KOREAN BROADCASTS
BEGAN AFTER TWO OF ITS SOLDIERS
WERE INJURED BY A LANDMINE
EXPLOSION IN THE D.M.Z. ON
AUGUST 4.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
SEOUL SOUTH KOREA IS JEAN LEE,
SHE IS A FELLOW AT THE WILSON
CENTER, WHICH CONDUCTS
INDEPENDENT RESEARCH ON GLOBAL
ISSUES.
LEE IS THE FORMER ASSOCIATED
PRESS BUREAU CHIEF IN THE NORTH
KOREAN CAPITAL OF PYONGYANG.
JANE, THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
YOU'VE JUST RETURNED FROM THE
BORDER AREA, CORRECT?
>> I HAVE.
I WAS UP THERE EARLIER TODAY.
I MADE A LITTLE DAY TRIP UP TO
PAJU, RIGHT ON THE BORDER ON
THE SOUTH KOREAN SIDE.
>> Larson: WE HEARD TENSIONS
HAVE BEEN VERY HIGH THIS WEEK.
WHAT CAN YOU TELL US ABOUT
TODAY?
>> I HAVE A FEELING THAT IT
LOOKS LOT MORE TENSE FROM
WHERE YOU'RE SITTING THAN IT DID
FOR ME IN PAJU.
I CAN TELL YOU ANY TIME I ASKED
PEOPLE IN PAJU IF THEY WERE
WORRIED THEY JUST LAUGHED AT THE
QUESTION.
SOUTH KOREANS ARE USED TO THIS
KIND OF TENSION.
THEY'VE BEEN DEALING WITH THIS
FOR DECADES AND TO A CERTAIN
DEGREE LIFE GOES ON AS USUAL.
THERE IS ABSOLUTELY NO SENSE OF
PANIC IN THE TOWN OF PAJU.
>> Larson: TO WHAT EXTENT DO
YOU THINK THIS IS SABER RATTLING
BY THE DIFFERENT LEADERS OF THE
TWO COUNTRIES?
OBVIOUSLY, THE NORTH KOREAN
LEADER NOT MUCH IS KNOWN ABOUT
THE PERSON'S ABILITY TO CONTROL
THE MILITARY IN THE SOUTH.
HE'S BEEN CRITICIZED FOR BEING
TOO SOFT.
IS THIS SORT OF AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR BOTH OF THEM TO LOOK TOUGH?
>> CERTAINLY.
I THINK YOU'VE GOT THAT RIGHT.
WITH THE NORTH KOREANS,
THESE KINDS PROVOCATIONS ARE A
WAY AIR, GOOD CHANCE TO REMIND
THE SOUTH KOREANS AND REMIND THE
WORLD THAT THE KOREAN WAR
REMAINS UNRESOLVED.
THE TWO SIDES AGREED TO A
CEASE-FIRE IN 1953 BUT THEY DID
NOT SIGN A PEACE TREATY SO THE
KOREAN PENINSULA REMAINS IN A
TECHNICAL STATE OF WAR AND IT'S
THE REASON THE U.S. MILITARY HAS
MORE THAN 28,000 TROOPS ON SOUTH
KOREAN SOILS.
NOW, NORTH KOREA MAY LOOK AT
THIS AS A REASON TO PROVOKE BUT
THERE'S NOTHING LIKE THE THREAT
OF AN OUTSIDE FORCE TO BRING OUT
PATRIOTISM, AND PERHAPS WHAT HE
WANTS TO SHOW HIS PEOPLE IS THAT
HE CAN DEFEND THEM FROM THIS
THREAT FROM SOUTH KOREA AND THE
UNITED STATES.
ON THE OTHER HAND, HE MAY WANT
TO SHOW HIS PEOPLE AS WELL THAT
HE'S A STATESMAN, THAT HE CAN
SUNDAY HIS AIDS INTO THE D.M.Z.
AND COME BACK WITH SOME SORT OF
SIGNIFICANT AGREEMENT WITH THE
SOUTH KOREANS.
SO I THINK THAT IT WILL BE
INTERESTING TO SEE HOW IT PANS
OUT.
I'M NOT SO SURE THAT THE
TENSIONS ARE QUITE OVER YET.
>> Larson: JEAN, FOR THE PAST
FOUR OR FIVE YEARS, CERTAINLY,
THIS SHOVING MATCH SEEMS TO TAKE
PLACE AROUND THIS TYPE OF YEAR
EVERY YEAR.
WHY IS THAT?
>> THE SOUTH KOREANS HOLD
MILITARY EXERCISES THIS TIME
OF YEAR AND THIS THEY CALL
DEFENSIVE EXERCISES BUT NORTH
KOREA CREATE IS AS A REHEARSAL
FOR INVASION.
SO IT DOES TEND TO RILE THEM UP.
IT'S NOT SURPRISING THAT THIS
KIND OF TENSION IS HAPPENING
THIS TIME OF YEAR.
THERE'S ONE OTHER THING THAT IS
GOING ON.
NORTH KOREA IS GEARING UP FOR A
MAJOR ANNIVERSARY, THE 70th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE WORKERS PARTY
OF KOREA.
THAT HAPPENS IN OCTOBER, AND SO
THAT IS ALSO AN OCCASION TO TRY
TO BRING THE PEOPLE TOGETHER.
SO THEY MAY BE LOOKING FOR
REASONS TO KIND OF DRAW THE
PEOPLE TOGETHER.
JEAN LEE FROM THE WILSON
CENTER.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Larson: IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, WE FOCUS ON PUERTO
RICO, IN THE MIDST OF AN
HISTORIC ECONOMIC CRISIS.
A U.S. TERRITORY SINCE 1898,
PUERTO RICO HAS ACCUMULATED
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN BOND DEBT
THAT IT IS INCREASINGLY UNABLE
TO PAY BACK.
THIS FOLLOWS A DECADE IN WHICH
HUNDREDS OF BUSINESSES AND
FACTORIES CLOSED, AND 300,000
RESIDENTS LEFT THE ISLAND.
AND TODAY, THE POVERTY RATE IN
PUERTO RICO IS HIGHER THAN THAT
OF ANY U.S. STATE.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
CHRIS BURY REPORTS ON POSSIBLE
SOLUTIONS TO PUERTO RICO'S
ECONOMIC TROUBLES.
>> Reporter: THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS IN PUERTO RICO IS CLEAR
IN THE EMERGENCY ROOM OF SAN
JUAN'S BIGGEST HOSPITAL, CENTRO
MEDICO, WHERE PATIENTS LINE THE
HALLS, BECAUSE THERE ARE NOT
ENOUGH NURSES TO TREAT THEM OR
ROOMS TO PUT THEM.
DOCTOR ROSALIE BARRIOS IS THE
HEAD OF EMERGENCY MEDICINE HERE.
>> THERE IS NO BEDS AVAILABLE IN
THE HOSPITAL, SO THEY HAVE TO
WAIT HERE FOR A BED.
>> Reporter: AND HOW LONG DOES
THAT TAKE?
>> SEVERAL DAYS?
>> Reporter: SEVERAL DAYS.
>> YES.
TO MAYBE A WEEK, YES.
>> Reporter: THE WEEK-LONG WAIT
IS A SYMPTOM OF PUERTO RICO'S
BIGGER TROUBLES: A THIRD OF THE
TERRITORY'S DEBT IS DUE, IN
PART, TO CRIPPLING HEALTH CARE
COSTS.
WITH MORE THAN 60% OF RESIDENTS
QUALIFYING FOR GOVERNMENT-
SUBSIDIZED HEALTHCARE, HOSPITALS
RELY ON THAT MONEY TO PROVIDE
SERVICES.
BUT THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
REIMBURSES PUERTO RICO AT A MUCH
LOWER RATE THAN STATES GET.
AND NOW, A DRAMATIC HIKE IN
SALES TAXES-- A NEW AUSTERITY
MEASURE TO HELP PUERTO RICO PAY
BACK ITS DEBT-- IS SQUEEZING
HEALTH CARE EVEN HARDER.
AT ASHFORD PRESBYTERIAN
COMMUNITY HOSPITAL IN SAN JUAN,
THE NEW, HIGHER TAXES ARE
COSTING THE HOSPITAL EVEN MORE
FOR EVERYTHING IT HAS TO BUY,
INCLUDING ALL ITS SUPPLIES,
ACCORDING TO C.E.O. PEDRO
GONZAÁLEZ.
>> THE IMPACT FOR US, FOR THE
YEAR, IS GOING TO BE ABOUT
$700,000.
>> Reporter: $700,000 MORE.
>> MORE, RIGHT.
>> Reporter: JUST FOR THE SALES
TAX.
>> FROM THE SALES TAX.
>> Reporter: THE HUGE HIKE IN
SALES TAXES ON THE ISLAND-- FROM
7% TO 11.5% PERCENT-- AND
ANOTHER NEW TAX ON SERVICES--
ARE EXPECTED TO GENERATE JUST
OVER A BILLION DOLLARS IN NEW
REVENUE.
NOT NEARLY ENOUGH TO PUT A
SIGNIFICANT DENT IN PUERTO
RICO'S $72 BILLION DEBT.
>> LA SITUACIOÓN ES EN EXTREMO
DIFIÍCIL.
>> Reporter: IN JUNE, PUERTO
RICO'S GOVERNOR, ALEJANDRO
GARCIA PADILLA, MADE A STUNNING
ANNOUNCEMENT, APPEARING ON
TELEVISION TO SAY, "THE PUBLIC
DEBT IS UNPAYABLE."
AND PLEDGED TO COME UP WITH A
PLAN BY THE END OF AUGUST.
PUERTO RICO IS IN A BIND.
THE WHITE HOUSE HAS FLATLY
REJECTED ANY KIND OF FEDERAL
BAILOUT.
AND THE TERRITORY DOES NOT HAVE
ACCESS TO THE U.S. BANKRUPTCY
COURTS.
SO PUERTO RICO HAS BEGUN TO
DEFAULT ON SOME OF ITS MASSIVE
DEBT, THE FIRST SUCH FAILURE TO
PAY BY AN AMERICAN STATE OR
TERRITORY SINCE THE GREAT
DEPRESSION.
DO YOU THINK THIS WILL GIVE
PUERTO RICO A BLACK EYE, THAT IT
WILL BE SEEN AS GREECE?
>> IT'S HAPPENING ALREADY.
AND I HATE IT.
PUERTO RICO'S NOT GREECE.
PUERTO RICO'S NOT A FOREIGN
COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: PEDRO PIERLUISI IS
PUERTO RICO'S NON-VOTING
REPRESENTATIVE TO CONGRESS.
WHY IS PUERTO RICO DEFAULTING ON
ITS DEBT?
>> WELL, FIRST, IT SHOULDN'T BE
DEFAULTING.
BUT THE TRUTH IS WE PILED UP
QUITE A BIT OF DEBT, AND I'M
TALKING ABOUT 18 GOVERNMENT
ENTITIES WHICH ISSUED BONDS FOR
DECADES.
>> Reporter: SOME OF THOSE BONDS
ARE GUARANTEED BY THE PUERTO
RICAN CONSTITUTION.
BUT OTHERS, SUCH AS THOSE ISSUED
BY THE GOVERNMENT-OWNED ELECTRIC
POWER AUTHORITY, ARE NOT.
CONGRESSMAN PIERLUISI HAS
INTRODUCED A BILL TO ALLOW THOSE
AGENCIES TO APPLY FOR CHAPTER 9
BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION, JUST LIKE
THEY CAN IN THE STATES.
IT WOULD LET PUERTO RICAN OWNED
ENTITIES AND CITIES DO WHAT
DETROIT DID: RESTRUCTURE DEBTS
WITH ALL THEIR CREDITORS AT THE
SAME TIME; WIPE THE SLATE CLEAN.
>> WE NEED CHAPTER 9, BECAUSE
WHEN YOU NEED TO REORGANIZE AN
ENTITY, ADJUST ITS DEBTS, THE
ONLY WAY TO DO IT IN THE U.S. IN
AN ORDERLY, LEGAL FASHION IS
UNDER THE PROTECTION OF A
FEDERAL BANKRUPTCY COURT.
WE CANNOT.
IT'S UNFAIR.
>> Reporter: THE BONDS WERE
POPULAR WITH INVESTORS, BECAUSE
THEY ARE TAX-FREE, PAY A HIGH
YIELD, AND SOME HAVE THAT
GUARANTEE IN PUERTO RICO'S
CONSTITUTION.
IT'S ESTIMATED THAT PUERTO RICO
RESIDENTS OWN ABOUT A THIRD OF
THE BONDS.
AMERICAN INVESTORS, INDIVIDUALLY
AND THROUGH MUTUAL FUNDS, OWN
BILLIONS AS WELL.
AND HEDGE FUNDS HAVE ALSO
SCOOPED UP A BIG CHUNK, OFTEN AT
BARGAIN PRICES.
ECONOMIST ARTURO PORZECANSKI, A
PROFESSOR AT AMERICAN
UNIVERSITY, SPENT THREE NEARLY
DECADES ON WALL STREET.
>> PASSAGE OF THE BILL WOULD BE
CORRECTLY PERCEIVED AS REWRITING
THE RULES RETROACTIVELY AND I
THINK IT WOULD BE A TERRIBLE
PRECEDENT FOR THE MUNICIPAL BOND
MARKET.
>> Reporter: HE OPPOSES
BANKRUPTCY BECAUSE HE SAYS THAT
WOULD MAKE IT HARDER IN THE
FUTURE FOR PUERTO RICO TO BORROW
MONEY IN THE BOND MARKETS.
>> THAT IS WHERE THE MONEY IS.
IT'S NOT IN PUERTO RICO'S BANKS,
IT'S NOT IN THE POCKETS OF THE
PEOPLE OF PUERTO RICO.
THEY HAVE TO COME OUT ELEGANTLY
FROM THIS CRISIS IN ORDER TO
RESUME NORMAL FINANCING.
>> WE BELIEVE PUERTO RICO NEEDS
AN ORDERLY PROCESS TO
RESTRUCTURE ITS UNSUSTAINABLE
LIABILITIES.
>> Reporter: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS INDICATED IT
SUPPORTS CONGRESS GIVING PUERTO
RICO THE SAME ACCESS TO FEDERAL
BANKRUPTCY COURTS.
SO HAVE SOME PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES, PERHAPS WITH AN EYE
ON FLORIDA WHERE NEARLY A
MILLION PUERTO RICANS NOW LIVE.
>> FLORIDA IS A BATTLEGROUND
STATE AND PUERTO RICANS ARE
REGISTERING THERE TO VOTE.
AND BY THE WAY PUERTO RICANS
COULD GO EITHER WAY.
DEPENDING ON THE STANCE, THE
PARTICULAR STANCE THAT THE
CANDIDATES TAKE.
>> Reporter: BUT SOME ON WALL
STREET OPPOSE ANY MAJOR
RESTRUCTURING OF PUERTO RICO'S
DEBT.
INSTEAD, A REPORT COMMISSIONED
BY MORE THAN 30 HEDGE FUNDS
DEMANDS MORE AUSTERITY IN A
TERRITORY STILL REELING FROM A
NEARLY TEN-YEAR-OLD RECESSION.
THE REPORT CALLS FOR MORE
AGGRESSIVE TAX COLLECTION,
PRIVATIZING PUBLIC WORKS, AND
FIRING MORE TEACHERS.
BUT PUERTO RICO HAS ALREADY SHUT
DOWN MORE THAN 150 SCHOOLS IN
THE LAST FEW YEARS, AND TEACHERS
ARE LEAVING, BEING ACTIVELY
BEING RECRUITED BY STATES.
DOCTORS AND NURSES ARE LEAVING
TOO.
OPHTHALMOLOGIST DR. RAUÚL
FRANCESCHI SAYS HE CAN EASILY
DOUBLE HIS SALARY IN THE STATES.
>> THERE ARE MANY PHYSICIANS
THAT ARE, WE HAVE THIS ESCAPE
VALVE THAT WE JUST GO TO ANY
STATE IN THE STATES.
WE DON'T HAVE TO STAY HERE.
WE CAN FLEE.
>> Reporter: HAVE YOU THOUGHT
ABOUT THAT?
>> WELL, IN THE BACK OF MY MIND,
YES.
AND THIS HAS BEEN A VERY, VERY
HARD YEAR.
>> Reporter: SO MANY PUERTO
RICANS ARE LEAVING FOR THE
UNITED STATES-- ABOUT 50,000
EVERY YEAR-- THAT OFFICIALS HERE
WORRY MORE AUSTERITY COULD
ACCELERATE THE EXODUS.
THEY SAY THAT PERPETUATES A
VICIOUS CYCLE, LEAVING THE
GOVERNMENT WITH EVEN LESS MONEY
TO PAY ITS DEBTS.
UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO
ECONOMIST ORLANDO SOTOMAYOR
BELIEVES WALL STREET'S REMEDY
WOULD BACKFIRE.
IS MORE AUSTERITY THE ANSWER?
>> NO, THE ANSWER IS GROWTH.
THERE IS, WE WILL JUST NEVER BE
ABLE TO PAY OUR DEBTS THROUGH
AUSTERITY.
YOU CANNOT PUSH A COUNTRY TOO
FAR, OR IT WILL JUST GO INTO
DEPRESSION OR RECESSION.
YOU CANNOT GET BLOOD FROM A
STONE.
>> Reporter: INSTEAD, AN
INFLUENTIAL NEW STUDY, SPONSORED
BY THE PUERTO RICAN GOVERNMENT
ADVOCATES LOWERING THE MINIMUM
WAGE BELOW THE SAME $7.25 AN
HOUR THAT APPLIES ON THE U.S.
MAINLAND, TO MAKE THE ISLAND
MORE COMPETITIVE WITH ITS
CARIBBEAN NEIGHBORS.
THE STUDY ALSO RECOMMENDS
EXEMPTING PUERTO RICO FROM A
1920 LAW THAT REQUIRES ALL GOODS
BE IMPORTED ON SHIPS BUILT IN
THE U.S., WHICH RAISES COSTS FOR
BUSINESSES LIKE JOEL FRANQUI'S
GIFT SHOP IN SAN JUAN.
>> SO, USUALLY ISLANDS ARE MORE
EXPENSIVE IN GENERAL, BUT I
BELIEVE PUERTO RICO IS EVEN MORE
EXPENSIVE BECAUSE OF THAT.
OTHER ISLANDS IN THE CARIBBEAN
DON'T HAVE THAT LIMITATION.
>> Reporter: OTHERS HERE ARE
CALLING FOR A REJUVENATION OF
PUERTO RICO'S ONCE-THRIVING
TOURISM INDUSTRY, IN 1980, THE
ISLAND ACCOUNTED FOR A QUARTER
OF ALL CARIBBEAN TOURIST
DOLLARS.
BY 2012, THAT NUMBER HAD FALLEN
TO 15%.
PUERTO RICO IS NOW ATTEMPTING TO
ADD MORE DIRECT FLIGHTS FROM ITS
MAIN AIRPORT, IN SAN JUAN.
ECONOMIST HEIDIE CALERO SAYS IT
ALSO NEEDS TO MAKE A BIG PUSH
FOR TOURISTS BEYOND THE UNITED
STATES.
>> AS LONG AS WE HAVE MORE
DIRECT FLIGHTS, PUERTO RICO IS
GOING TO THRIVE.
BUT WE NEED TO DIVERSIFY.
WE HAVE NEGLECTED GOING INTO
EUROPE, GOING INTO LATIN AMERICA
>> Reporter: PUERTO RICO IS ALSO
TRYING TO ATTRACT MORE WEALTHY
AMERICANS BY OFFERING GENEROUS
NEW TAX BREAKS ON INVESTMENT
INCOME FOR THOSE WHO LIVE HERE
AT LEAST SIX MONTHS A YEAR.
THE IDEA IS TO LURE MORE BIG
SPENDERS TO BOOST THE ECONOMY.
SO FAR, THE GOVERNMENT REPORTS,
A FEW HUNDRED PEOPLE HAVE MADE
THE MOVE, GENERATING MORE THAN
$200 MILLION IN REAL ESTATE
SALES.
>> IT'S NOT GOING TO MAKE MUCH
DIFFERENCE IN TERMS OF ECONOMIC
GROWTH.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME IT DOES
CREATE QUITE A BIT OF
RESENTMENT.
BECAUSE WE HAVE THIS GROUP OF
VERY WEALTHY INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE
GIVEN THE BEST TREATMENT ON THE
PART OF THE GOVERNMENT.
THEY PAY VERY FEW TAXES, WHEREAS
REGULAR PUERTO RICANS HAVE TO
DEAL WITH THIS VERY HIGH TAX
BURDEN.
>> Reporter: WITH SO MANY NATIVE
PUERTO RICANS LEAVING, THE
POPULATION LEFT BEHIND IS
INCREASINGLY OLD AND POOR,
PUTTING MORE OF A STRAIN ON A
HEALTH CARE SYSTEM THAT IS
LITERALLY RUNNING OUT OF MONEY.
THAT PUERTO RICO IS AILING IS AS
CLEAR AS THE LONG LINES IN SAN
JUAN'S HOSPITALS AND CLINICS.
BUT IT'S JUST AS EVIDENT THE
GOVERNMENT HERE IS STILL
SEARCHING FOR THE RIGHT CURE.
>> Larson: FIND OUT HOW PUERTO
RICO'S DEBT GREW AND WHY
THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS ARE
LEAVING THE ISLAND.
WATCH CHRIS BURY'S FIRST REPORT
AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Larson: THIS WEEK, THE
MILITANT GROUP KNOWN AS THE
ISLAMIC STATE, OR ISIS, PUBLICLY
EXECUTED ONE OF SYRIA'S TOP
SCHOLARS FOR REFUSING TO REVEAL
THE LOCATION OF SOME OF THE
NATION'S ANTIQUITIES IN THE
ANCIENT CITY OF PALMYRA.
THE VIOLENT ACT IS PART OF A
CAMPAIGN TO DESTROY CULTURAL
HERITAGE CARRIED OUT BY ISIS AS
IT TAKES OVER TERRITORY IN
SYRIA, IRAQ, AND ELSEWHERE IN
THE MIDDLE EAST.
BUT A PAIR OF CYBER-
ARCHAEOLOGISTS ARE USING
TECHNOLOGY IN AN ATTEMPT TO
VIRTUALLY RESTORE WHAT HAS BEEN
LOST.
NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: THIS VIDEO APPEARS
TO SHOW MEMBERS OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE, OR ISIS, USING
SLEDGEHAMMERS TO DESTROY
ARTIFACTS AT A MUSEUM IN MOSUL,
IRAQ, EARLIER THIS YEAR.
SOME ARTIFACTS WERE THOUSANDS OF
YEARS OLD, LIKE THIS WINGED BULL
FROM ANCIENT MESOPOTAMIA.
>> IT'S NOT A EUPHEMISM TO REFER
TO IRAQ AND SYRIA AS THE CRADLE
OF CIVILIZATION.
>> Reporter: LISA ACKERMAN IS
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT OF THE
WORLD MONUMENTS FUND, A NEW
YORK-BASED ORGANIZATION FOCUSED
ON CULTURAL HERITAGE
PRESERVATION.
>> IT'S NOT JUST THE PHYSICAL
REMAINS THAT ARE GOING AWAY BUT
POTENTIALLY OUR KNOWLEDGE OF HOW
RICH THESE REGIONS ARE AND THE
MANY DIFFERENT KINDS OF PEOPLE
THAT HAVE TRAVERSED THAT TERRAIN
OVER A VERY LONG PERIOD OF HUMAN
EXISTENCE.
>> Reporter: NOW, TWO EUROPE-
BASED ARCHAEOLOGISTS, CHANCE
COUGHENOUR AND MATTHEW VINCENT,
ARE DEPLOYING THREE-DIMENSIONAL
COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY TO SAVE THIS
HISTORY.
THEY SPOKE TO NEWSHOUR VIA
GOOGLE HANGOUT.
>> WE BOTH HAVE A BACKGROUND IN
DIGITAL CULTURAL HERITAGE AND
THE PRESERVATION OF HERITAGE,
AND I SUGGESTED THAT MAYBE WE
COULD FIND A SOLUTION TO
CROWDSOURCE IMAGES FROM PEOPLE
AND RECONSTRUCTING THE ARTIFACTS
IN 3-D.
>> Reporter: WHAT BEGAN AS A
DESIRE TO DOCUMENT LOST
ANTIQUITIES BECAME PROJECT
MOSUL, WITH A WEBSITE FOR ANYONE
TO SUBMIT PICTURES AND VIDEOS OF
DESTROYED ARTIFACTS IN IRAQ
THE TEAM HOPES TO CREATE A
VIRTUAL MUSEUM.
>> IT SEEMS LIKE MAGIC.
I MEAN WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT
TAKING PHOTOGRAPHS AND TAKING
THOSE PHOTOGRAPHS AND TURNING
THEM INTO THREE-DIMENSIONAL
MODELS, IT'S YOU KNOW, SOMETHING
THAT'S KIND OF HARD TO FATHOM.
>> Reporter: TRANSFORMING TWO-
DIMENSIONAL IMAGES INTO 3-D
RECONSTRUCTIONS REQUIRES A TEAM
OF VOLUNTEERS USING
PHOTOGRAMMETRY, WHICH ESTIMATES
MEASUREMENTS FROM EXISTING
PHOTOS TO CREATE MODELS.
HERE'S HOW IT WORKS:
IN THIS RECREATION OF THE LION
OF MOSUL, 16 PICTURES TAKEN FROM
DIFFERENT ANGLES, SEEN HERE AS
BLUE SQUARES, ARE ALIGNED TO
FIND COMMON FEATURES.
THOSE OVERLAPPING FEATURES,
REPRESENTED BY BLACK DOTS, ARE
THEN CONNECTED, AND A VIRTUAL
TEXTURE IS WRAPPED ONTO THE
MODEL.
BECAUSE THESE REPLICAS OFTEN
RELY ON ONLY A FEW PHOTOS,
WITHOUT ACTUAL MEASUREMENTS OF
THE OBJECTS, THEY CAN NEVER BE
EXACT.
>> THIS IS IN ESSENCE, KIND OF
A REVERSE ENGINEERING WAY OF
GOING ABOUT FINDING IMAGES THAT
LINE UP OR MATCH OR WERE TAKEN
FROM A PARTICULAR ANGLE THAT ARE
SUPPORTIVE OF CREATING A THREE-
DIMENSIONAL MODEL.
>> Reporter: SO MORE PICTURES
MAKE A BETTER MODEL.
>> OFTEN TIMES WE MAY HAVE
HUNDREDS OF IMAGES FOR A SINGLE
ARTIFACT.
IN THIS CASE WE MAY HAVE A
DOZEN.
YOU KNOW, SO SIMPLE THERE IS NO
WAY FOR US TO REALLY SPEAK TO
THE ACCURACY, AND WHICH IS WHY
WE OFTEN EMPHASIZE THAT THE MOST
IMPORTANT PART OF WHAT WE GET
WITH THESE RECONSTRUCTIONS IS
THE VISUALIZE REPRESENTATION.
>> Reporter: THE PROJECT ISN'T
JUST FOCUSED ON THE MIDDLE EAST.
IN APRIL, NEPAL WAS HIT BY A 7.8
MAGNITUDE EARTHQUAKE LEAVING
MANY ANCIENT SITES DAMAGED.
PROJECT MOSUL IS NOW HOSTING THE
3-D RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIFACTS
DESTROYED IN KATHMANDU'S DURBAR
SQUARE DURING THE MASSIVE
EARTHQUAKE.
>> IT'S THIS INCREDIBLE
OPPORTUNITY TO AT THE VERY LEAST
GET A GOOD HANDLE ON WHAT
MATERIALS ARE OUT THERE, AND
DEMONSTRATING THAT IF THE WORST
HAPPENS, AND WE LOSE SITES, AT
LEAST THERE'S A VERY POWERFUL
RECORD OF THEM.
>> Larson: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND ON SUNDAY: NEARLY 30
YEARS AFTER THE NUCLEAR
DISASTER, CHERNOBYL'S SURPRISING
RECOVERY.
>> IF TAKE HUMANS OUT OF THE
EQUATION, THE WILDLIFE SURGE IS
BACK DESPITE CONTAMINATION.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Larson: 30 GERMAN POLICE
OFFICERS WERE INJURED EARLY
TODAY QUELLING ANTI-IMMIGRANT
PROTESTS, NEAR DRESDEN.
PROTESTERS HURLED BOTTLES AND
STONES AT SECURITY FORCES, AND
BLOCKED THE ROAD LEADING TO A
NEW SHELTER FOR 600 MIGRANTS
SEEKING POLITICAL ASYLUM.
GERMANY EXPECTS REFUGEES FROM
THE MIDDLE EAST, AFRICA, AND THE
BALKANS TO FILE AS MANY AS
800,000 ASYLUM APPLICATIONS THIS
YEAR.
FURTHER EAST, IN MACEDONIA,
SECURITY FORCES TODAY CLASHED
WITH MIGRANTS, MANY OF THEM
SYRIAN REFUGEES, TRYING TO CROSS
THE BORDER FROM GREECE.
MACEDONIA ALLOWED 600 MIGRANTS
TO CONTINUE ONTO SERBIA BY
TRAIN, BUT REFUSED ADMITTANCE TO
HUNDREDS MORE.
ABOUT 2,000 MIGRANTS A DAY HAVE
BEEN ARRIVING IN MACEDONIA.
50,000 LANDED IN GREECE BY BOAT
LAST MONTH.
A FEDERAL JUDGE IN CALIFORNIA
HAS ORDERED THE RELEASE OF
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANT CHILDREN
HELD IN U.S. DETENTION
FACILITIES.
THE CHILDREN ARE SUPPOSED TO BE
RELEASED TO A PARENT OR RELATIVE
IN THE U.S., AND THE ORDER
REQUIRES ANY PARENT DETAINED
WITH THEM BE RELEASED AS WELL.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS
UNTIL LATE OCTOBER TO COMPLY.
IN THE PAST TWO YEARS, U.S.
BORDER AGENTS HAVE APPREHENDED
NEARLY 100,000 UNDOCUMENTED
FAMILIES, MOSTLY MOTHERS AND
CHILDREN, FROM MEXICO AND
CENTRAL AMERICA.
ABOUT 1,400 ARE BEING HELD AT
NEW DETENTION FACILITIES IN
TEXAS AND IN PENNSYLVANIA THAT
THE JUDGE HAS CALLED UNSAFE AND
UNSANITARY.
SEPARATELY, IN TEXAS,
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS HAVE
ASKED A FEDERAL JUDGE TO
INTERVENE, SO THEIR U.S. BORN
CHILDREN CAN OBTAIN BIRTH
CERTIFICATES.
FAMILIES WANT THE CERTIFICATES
SO THEIR CHILDREN CAN ATTEND
TEXAS PUBLIC SCHOOLS THIS FALL.
TEXAS OFFICIALS HAVE REFUSED TO
ISSUE THEM, SAYING THE
UNDOCUMENTED PARENTS LACK VALID
U.S. IDENTIFICATION.
>> Larson: THAT'S IT FOR THIS
EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
I'M JOHN LARSON.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.